Multiple intelligences in the classroom

In 1904, the French Minister of Education commissioned psychologist Alfred Binet, also French, and a group of colleagues to develop a method to determine which primary school students were "at risk" of academic failure so that they could be offered specific attention. From their efforts came the
first intelligence tests. Imported to the United States several years later, these tests spread throughout the country, as did the notion that there was something called "intelligence" that could be measured objectively and expressed with an "IQ" number or score. Almost eighty years after the first intelligence tests,
A Harvard psychologist named Howard Gardner posed a challenge to this established idea. After stating that our culture had defined the concept of "intelligence" too narrowly, he proposed the existence of at least seven basic intelligences (Structures of the mind, 1983). Not long ago, Gardner added a
eighth intelligence and spoke about the possibility of a ninth (Gardner, 1999b). With his theory of multiple intelligences (MI theory), Gardner sought to expand the scope of human potential beyond the confines of the IQ figure. The validity of determining an individual's intelligence by separating him from his natural learning environment and asking him to perform tasks that he has never done before (and will probably never do again if he has the choice) has been seriously questioned. Gardner suggested that intelligence is rather about the ability to 1) solve problems and 2) create products in a context-rich and naturalistic environment.

Description of the eight intelligences
After adopting this broader and more pragmatic perspective, the concept of "intelligence" began to lose its mystery to become a functional concept that develops in people's lives in many different ways. Gardner provided a method to map the wide range of capabilities that human beings possess, grouping them into eight categories or "intelligence":

Linguistic intelligence. Ability to use words effectively, either orally (for example, as a storyteller, speaker, or politician) or in writing (poets, playwrights, editors, journalists). This intelligence includes the ability to handle syntax or the structure of language, phonology or the sounds of language, semantics or the meanings of words, and pragmatic dimensions or practical uses of language. Some of these uses are rhetoric (use of language to convince others to perform a certain action), mnemonics (use of language to remember information), explanation (use of language to inform), and metalanguage (use of language to speak one's own language).

Mathematical intelligence. Ability to use numbers effectively (mathematicians, accountants, statisticians) and to reason well (scientists, computer programmers, logic specialists). This intelligence includes sensitivity to logical patterns and relationships, statements and propositions (if...then, cause-and-effect), functions, and other related abstractions. The processes used in logical-mathematical intelligence include: categorization, classification, deduction, generalization, calculation and hypothesis testing.

Spatial intelligence. Ability to perceive the visuospatial world accurately (for example, as a hunter, escort or guide) and to carry out transformations based on those perceptions (interior designers, architects, artists, inventors). This intelligence involves sensitivity to color, lines, shape, space and the relationships between these elements. It includes the ability to visualize, to graphically represent visual or spatial ideas, and to orient oneself correctly in a spatial matrix.

Kinesthetic intelligence. Control of one's own body
express ideas and feelings (actors, mimes, athletes or dancers), and ease of using their hands in the creation or transformation of objects (craftsmen, sculptors, mechanics, surgeons). This intelligence includes specific physical abilities, such as coordination, balance, dexterity, strength, flexibility and speed, as well as proprioceptive, tactile and haptic abilities.

Musical intelligence. Ability to perceive (as a music fan), discriminate (music critics), transform (composers) and express (performers) musical forms. This intelligence includes sensitivity to the rhythm, pitch or melody, and timbre or color of a piece of music. Music can be understood from a figurative or “top-down” (global, intuitive), formal or “bottom-up” (analytical, technical) perspective, or both.

Interpersonal intelligence. Ability to perceive and distinguish the moods, intentions, motivations and feelings of other people. It may include sensitivity to facial expressions, voices, and gestures; the ability to distinguish between numerous types of interpersonal signals, and to respond
effectively and pragmatically to those signals (for example, influencing a group of people to take a certain action).

Intrapersonal intelligence. Self-knowledge and the ability to act on that knowledge. This intelligence includes an accurate image of oneself (one's strengths and limitations), awareness of one's moods, intentions, motivations, temperaments, and inner desires, and the capacity for self-discipline, self-understanding, and self-esteem.

Naturalistic intelligence. Ability to recognize and classify the numerous species of flora and fauna in the environment. It also includes sensitivity to other natural phenomena (cloud formations and mountains) and, in the case of individuals raised in an urban environment, the ability to distinguish inanimate shapes such as cars, sports shoes, or CD covers.

Theoretical basis of the theory of MI
Faced with the eight categories (and especially in the case of musical, spatial, and bodily-kinetic categories), many people wonder why Howard Gardner insists on calling them “intelligence,” and not “talents” or “aptitudes.” Gardner realized that people are used to hearing expressions like, "He's not very intelligent, but he has an extraordinary aptitude for music." Therefore, he was very conscious of his use of the word "intelligence" to describe each category. In an interview, Gardner stated: "I'm being a little provocative, but deliberately so. If I said there were seven types of competencies, people would say “Yes, yes.” But by calling them “intelligence” I am saying that we have put a diversity called intelligence on a pedestal, and that in reality there is a plurality of intelligences, some of which we would never have considered as such. In order to provide a theoretical basis for his statements, Gardner established some basic "tests" that each intelligence must pass to be considered as such and not simply remain a talent, an ability or an aptitude. The criteria he used included the following eight factors: Potential isolation due to brain damage. Through his work at the Boston Veterans Administration, Gardner dealt with individuals who had suffered accidents or illnesses that affected specific areas of the brain. In several cases, brain lesions appeared to have impaired a specific intelligence, while the others remained intact. For example, a person with a lesion in Broca's area (the left frontal lobe) could have suffered substantial damage to their linguistic intelligence and experience subsequent difficulties in speaking, reading and writing. However, he would retain his ability to sing, perform mathematical calculations, dance, reflect on his feelings, and relate to others. A person with a lesion in the temporal lobe of the right hemisphere could lose their musical abilities, while lesions of the frontal lobe mainly affect personal intelligences. Gardner therefore argues for the existence of eight relatively autonomous brain systems, a more sophisticated and updated version of the "right brain/left brain" learning model popular in the 1970s.

Existence of geniuses, prodigies and other exceptional individuals. Gardner suggests that in some people we can see the presence of specific intelligences that operate at very high levels, like enormous mountains that rise against the background of a flat horizon. Geniuses are individuals who demonstrate an ability
superior in one part of a given intelligence, while the rest of the intelligences function at a low level. Apparently, there are geniuses in each of the eight intelligences. For example, in the movie Rain Man (based on a true story), Dustin Hoffman plays the role of Raymond, a logical-mathematical genius who is able to quickly and head-on solve multi-digit operations and other surprising mathematical feats; On the other hand, he finds it difficult to relate to others, demonstrates low linguistic competence and is unable to reflect on his own life. There are geniuses who draw exceptionally well, or who have a spectacular musical memory (for example, they are able to interpret a composition after listening to it just once), who read complex material although they do not understand its content (hyperlexics), or who have a sensitive exceptional towards nature or animals (see, for example, Sacks, 1995).

Distinctive developmental history and definable set of skills. Gardner suggests that intelligences receive a stimulus when participating in some activity with cultural value and that the individual's growth in that activity follows a developmental pattern. Every activity based on intelligence has its own developmental trajectory, that is, it has its own moment of emergence in early childhood, its peak throughout life, and its pattern of decline (whether rapid or gradual) as it progresses. that we get older. Musical composition, for example, seems to be among the activities with cultural value that previously
They develop a high level of efficiency: Mozart was only 5 years old when he began to compose. Many composers and performers continue their activity into their eighties, so that skill in the field of musical composition also seems to remain in good health in old age.
High mathematical ability, on the other hand, seems to follow a somewhat different trajectory. It does not manifest itself as early as the ability to compose music (5-year-olds still function quite concretely with logical ideas), but it reaches its peak at a relatively early age. Many great mathematical and scientific ideas come from teenagers; This is the case of Blaise Pascal and Karl Friedrich Gauss. In fact, a review
to the history of mathematics suggests that original mathematical ideas are exhausted once they are over 40 years old. When people reach this age, it is considered that they have already done everything when it comes to this discipline. However, most of us can breathe easy, as this decline does not seem to affect
more practical skills, like balancing a checkbook.
On the other hand, it is possible to become a successful novelist in your 40s, 50s, or later. You can even be over 75 and decide to become a painter: Grandma Moses (stage name of Anna Mary Robertson Moses) did it. Gardner points out that we need to use several different developmental maps to understand the eight intelligences. Piaget provides a comprehensive map for logical-mathematical intelligence, but we may have to turn to Erik Erikson for a map of the development of personal intelligences, and to Noam Chomsky or Lev Vygotsky for models of the development of linguistic intelligence.
Finally, Gardner (1994) indicates that the best way to observe intelligences operating at their peak is to study their "final states" in the lives of truly exceptional individuals. We can appreciate musical intelligence at work by studying Beethoven's Ninth Symphony, the naturalistic one through Darwin's theory of evolution, or the spatial intelligence in the frescoes painted by Michelangelo in the Sistine Chapel. Table 1.1 (pp. 23-25) includes examples of end states for each intelligence.
Evolutionary history and evolutionary plausibility. Gardner concludes that each of the eight intelligences has deep roots in the evolution of human beings and even earlier, in the evolution of other species. Thus, for example, spatial intelligence can be studied in the cave paintings of Lascaux and in the way in which certain insects orient themselves in space while searching for flowers. Similarly, musical intelligence dates back to archaeological evidence for the first musical instruments, and is also present in the wide variety of bird songs. Table 1.1 (pp. 28-29) includes notes on the evolutionary origins of intelligences. MI theory also has a historical context. Certain intelligences seem to have been more important in the past than they are today. Naturalism and body kinetics, for example, would be valued more in the United States a hundred years ago, when the majority of the population lived in a rural environment and the ability to hunt, gather grain, and build silos would have great social approval. Likewise, certain intelligences could become more important in the future. As the percentage of the population receiving information through movies, television, videotapes, and CDs increases, the value placed on highly developed spatial intelligence could grow. Likewise, there is currently a growing need for individuals with naturalistic intelligence to help protect threatened ecosystems. Table 1.1 (pp. 28-29) points out some historical factors that have influenced the value given to each intelligence. Support of psychometric data. Standardized measures of human ability provide the “test” that most theories of intelligence (and numerous theories of learning style) use to test the validity of a model.
Although Gardner is not a proponent of standardized testing and, in fact, has been a passionate advocate of alternatives to formal testing (see Chapter 10), he suggests that we can turn to numerous standardized tests to support the theory of multiple intelligences (although Gardner would point out that such tests assess multiple intelligences in a completely out of context way). For example, the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children includes subtests that require linguistic (e.g., information, vocabulary), logical-mathematical (arithmetic), spatial (image distribution), and, to a lesser extent, bodily-kinetic (assembling objects) intelligence. ). There are other tests that take advantage of personal intelligences (for example, the Vineland Society Maturity Scale and the Coopersmith Self Esteem Inventory). Chapter 3 includes a study of the types of formal tests associated with each of the eight intelligences.
Support of experimental psychological tasks. Gardner suggests that by examining specific psychological studies we can witness the functioning of separate intelligences. For example, in studies where subjects master a specific skill, such as reading, but fail to transfer that skill to another field, such as mathematics, we see the failure of linguistic ability to transition to logical-mathematical intelligence.
Similarly, in studies of cognitive abilities such as memory, perception or attention, we verify that individuals have selective abilities. Certain individuals, for example, may have superior memory for words but not so much for faces; Others may manifest acute perception of musical sounds, but not verbal sounds. Each of these cognitive faculties, therefore, are specific to an intelligence. This means that people can demonstrate different levels of performance in each cognitive area of the eight intelligences. A core application or set of identifiable applications.
Gardner states that, in the same way that a computer program requires a set of applications (for example, the DOS operating system) to function, each intelligence has a group of central operations that serve to drive its different activities. In musical intelligence, for example, those
Components may consist of sensitivity to pitch or the ability to distinguish between various rhythmic structures. In bodily-kinesthetic intelligence, core operations may include the ability to imitate the physical movements of other people or the ability to master established fine motor routines to build a structure. Gardner speculates that these core operations will one day be identified with such precision that they can be simulated by computer. Susceptibility to coding in a symbol system. One of the best indicators of intelligent behavior is, according to Gardner, the ability of human beings to use symbols. The word "cat" written on this page is nothing more than a group of signs printed in a specific way. And yet, it suggests to us a whole world of associations, images and memories. What has happened is that something has appeared in the present ("re-present-ation") that is not really here. Gardner suggests that the ability to symbolize constitutes one of the most important factors that distinguishes humans from most other species. Each of the eight intelligences of his theory can be symbolized. Each intelligence, in fact, has its own symbolic or notational systems. In the case of linguistic intelligence, there are numerous oral and written languages, such as English, French or Spanish. Spatial intelligence includes a range of graphic languages used by architects, engineers and designers, as well as certain ideographic languages, such as Chinese. Table 1.1 (pp. 23-25) includes examples of symbol systems for the eight intelligences.
key points of MI theory
In addition to the descriptions of the eight intelligences and their theoretical bases, it is worth remembering certain points of the model:
1. We all have the eight intelligences. The MI theory is not a "standard theory" to determine the only adequate intelligence. It is a theory about cognitive functioning, and proposes that every person has capabilities in the eight intelligences. Of course, intelligences work together in a unique way
for each person. There are those who appear to possess extremely high levels of performance of all or most of the eight intelligences (for example, the German poet, statesman, scientist, naturalist, and philosopher Johann Wolfgang von Goethe). Other people, such as those who go to institutions dedicated to individuals
With developmental disabilities, they seem to manifest only the most rudimentary aspects of intelligence. Most of us would fall between these two extremes: highly developed in some intelligences, modestly in others and relatively underdeveloped in the rest.
2. Most people can develop each intelligence to an adequate level of competence. Although an individual may lament his shortcomings in a certain field and consider his problems to be innate and unsolvable, Gardner suggests that virtually everyone has the capacity to
develop all eight intelligences to a reasonable level of performance if we receive appropriate support, enrichment and training. Gardner points to the Suzuki Talent Education Movement as an example that individuals with little natural musical talent can achieve a sophisticated level of proficiency on the violin or piano through a combination of the right environmental influences (parental involvement, exposure to to classical music from childhood and early instruction). Educational models of this type exist for other intelligences (see, for example, Edwards, 1979).
3. In general, intelligences work together in a complex way. Gardner points out that each of the intelligences described is actually a "fiction," that is, that no intelligence exists on its own in real life (except, perhaps, in very isolated cases of geniuses and individuals with brain damage). The intelligences
They always interact with each other. To prepare a meal you must read the recipe (linguistic), perhaps divide the quantities by two (logical-mathematical), develop a menu that satisfies all family members (interpersonal) and calm your own appetite (intrapersonal). When a child plays kicking a ball, he needs kinetic-corporal intelligence (running, kicking the ball, catching the ball), spatial intelligence (orienting himself on the playing field and anticipating the trajectory of the ball), linguistic and interpersonal. (correctly state your own point of view if an argument occurs during the game). In MI theory, intelligences are taken out of context for the sole purpose of examining their main characteristics and learning how to use them effectively. We must always remember to return them to their specific culturally valued contexts when we complete their formal study.
4. There are many ways to be smart in each category. There is no standard set of attributes to possess.
to be considered intelligent in a certain field. Consequently, a person may not know how to read, but be very linguistically competent because he is able to narrate an extraordinary story or has an extensive oral vocabulary. Likewise, an individual may be very clumsy in sports but show superior bodily-kinesthetic intelligence by weaving a rug or creating an inlaid chess board. MI theory emphasizes the rich diversity with which individuals manifest their gifts within and between intelligences. (See Chapter 3 for more information on the different attributes of each intelligence.)

